## Geomorphic Covariance Structure (GCS) analysis GUI

### Package contents
- Graphic user interface executable script (gcs_gui.py)
- Python files defining GUi implemented function/methods
- Copy of RapidLasso's LAStools software (http://lastools.org/)
- Copy of 'Breeze' GUI theme (https://github.com/MaxPerl/ttk-Breeze)

### Pre-requisite packages
- arcpy (+ Spatial Analyst licence)
-- Comes with ArcGIS Python 3 default environment. 
  Clone environment to enable external package installation. 
- pillow (https://python-pillow.org/)
- plotly (https://plotly.com/)
- seaborn (https://seaborn.pydata.org/)

### Setting up -- Create a folder containing following:
- LAS/LAZ point cloud data files with spatial extents/footprint that
  capture a river valley's in-channel topography. 
  - Either bathymetric LiDAR or traditional LiDAR collected during dry channel conditions.
- Any shapefile (.shp) from the LiDAR project's metadata that has a spatial reference frame matching the point cloud data.
  - Can also be manually created based on project metadata files.
- A shapefile (.shp) defining the analysis area of interest (AOI).
  -   Projected in a spatial reference frame with desired analysis units (Meters 
      or US Feet)This shapefile's spatial reference is applied to all output  files.
- A folder (within the top level directory) containing only 4-band, 1m- resolution
  NAIP imagery .jp2 files that cover the AOI. 


### Literature 
This package applies a GCS analysis that has been refined over the
past decade. The applied methodology is described in  detail, as well as linked to known hydro-
morphodynamic fluvial mechanisms, within the following publications (in chronological order):
- MacWilliams, M. L., Wheaton, J. M., Pasternack, G. B., Street, R. L., &amp; Kitanidis, P. K.
(2006). Flow convergence routing hypothesis for pool-riffle maintenance in alluvial
rivers. Water Resources Research, 42(10), 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2005WR004391
   

- Wyrick, J. R., &amp; Pasternack, G. B. (2016). Revealing the natural complexity of topographic
change processes through repeat surveys and decision-tree classification. Earth Surface
Processes and Landforms, 41(6), 723–737. https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.3854
  

- Brown, R. A., &amp; Pasternack, G. B. (2017). Bed and width oscillations form coherent
patterns in a partially confined, regulated gravel-cobble-bedded river adjusting to
anthropogenic disturbances. Earth Surface Dynamics, 5(1), 1–20.
https://doi.org/10.5194/esurf-5-1-2017
  

- Pasternack, G. B., Baig, D., Weber, M. D., &amp; Brown, R. A. (2018a). Hierarchically nested
river landform sequences. Part 1: Theory. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms,
43(12), 2510–2518. https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.4411
  

- Pasternack, G. B., Baig, D., Weber, M. D., &amp; Brown, R. A. (2018b). Hierarchically nested
river landform sequences. Part 2: Bankfull channel morphodynamics governed by
valley nesting structure. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 43(12), 2519–2532.
https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.4410

For those without access to  journal publications, or looking for a synopsis of the pertinent
literature, a YouTube video by Gregory Pasternack (Ph.D) is available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yvikf8C8Fxs


## Using the GUI
The GUI has seven tabs, each enabling different segments of the GCS analysis methodology.
The tabs are designed to be ran sequentially, and in some cases require manual inputs or inspection between them.
The outputs of a step/tab are typically the inputs of the next one. Do not alter the file
structure that is automatically generated by this package, as this can introduce errors or bugs.
The sections below describe the goals, inputs, outputs, and user requirements associated with each step of the analysis.
Different user choices can effect the final analysis results in relevant ways, therefore we recomended referencing this
guide prior to any choosing parameters or manually editing shapefiles.


#### Tab 1 -- Prepping LiDAR data from processing
Overview: LiDAR data point files are prepared for LAStools vegetation point removal. NAIP imagery is used to generate 
a NDVI raster and create a polygon representing non-vegetated bare-ground.
 
Inputs:
- The directory containing river valley LiDAR point cloud files (see 'Setting up')
- The directory containing NAIP imagery (see 'Setting up')
- A shapefile with the LiDAR project's spatial reference frame (see 'Setting up')
- A shapefile defining the area of interest in the desired output spatial reference frame (see 'Setting up')
  - This shapefile should be manually edited to somewhat tightly surround the river channel and flood-plain.
  - Do not exclude any areas that could be submerged under flood stage flows, but excess AOI coverage will substantially 
    slow the LiDAR processing step.
  - Define the shapefile's spatial reference frame (including vertical). This will be the reference frame 
    of all output files, and defines the units used within the analysis.
- NDVI threshold (default is 0.4)
  - NDVI = Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normalized_difference_vegetation_index)
  - The threshold corresponds to the minimum NDVI value that gets defined as vegetation.
  - In arid regions, lower values may be required (0.15-0.3).
  - **USER INPUT :** Inspect the 'veg_poly.shp' file within the output folder. Verify vegetation mask
    quality. Adjust NDVI value and run again if necessary.

Relevant outputs: 
- A shapefile representing bare-ground -- ground_poly.shp 
- A shapefile representing the LiDAR data extent -- las_footprint.shp

#### Tab 2 -- Generating a ground-surface DEM from LiDAR data
Overview: LiDAR point cloud files (LAS format) are processed using Rapidlasso LAStools
functionality to remove vegetation returns, and ideally, leave a point cloud representing bare ground topography.
Next, the processed point cloud is converted into a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) using a user selected
interpolation algorithm.

Inputs:
  - The directory containing river valley LiDAR point cloud files (see 'Setting up')
  - The bare-ground shapefile created in the previous step (ground_poly.shp)
  - The area of interest (AOI) shapefile with the desired output spatial reference frame  (see 'Setting up')
  - **USER INPUT:** RapidLasso las_ground parameters for vegetated and non-vegetated areas
      - Recommended starting parameters in US FT:
        - Step size: 0.9 (standard), 0.1 (fine)
        - Bulge: 0.1 (both)Spike: 0.15 (both)
        - Down spike: 0.3 (both)
        - Offset: 0.015 (standard), 0.15 (fine)
      - For more infomation on these parameters see LAStools documentation (https://github.com/LAStools/LAStools/blob/master/bin/lasground_new_README.txt)
  - The units that the processing parameters were entered in
  - The number of cores your computer has
  - Optional box allowing intermediate vegetation point clouds to be deleted
  - **USER INPUT:** The desired output DEM resolution in the units specified by the AOI shapefile
  - **USER INPUT:** Interpolation method (Binning or Triangulation), and sub-methods
      - Binning assigns the average of all LiDAR points within a cell
          - If selected, choose a Void Fill Method to determine the value of cells not containing LiDAR points
            ('LINEAR', 'SIMPLE', or 'NATURAL_NEIGHBOR')
      - Triangulation assigns cell values by first converting the LiDAR point cloud to a Triangulation Irregular 
        Network (TIN), and then applying an interpolation algorithm
           - If selected, choose the interpolation algorithm used for TIN generation ('LINEAR', 'NATURAL_NEIGHBOR')
           - Triangulation is typically faster than binning, and recommended for large datasets
      - For more information on LAS to raster interpolation methods see ArcGIS documentation 
        (https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/latest/tool-reference/conversion/las-dataset-to-raster.htm)

Relevant Outputs:
  - A topo-bathymetric digital elevation model (DEM) in the selected resolution representing bare ground and channel 
    topography -- las_dem.tif

#### Tab 3 -- Generating a thalweg centerline + elevation profile
Overview: A thalweg centerline is generated using a smoothed version of the topo-bathymetric DEM. Elevation values are
sampled along the centerline at 1m intervals, and used to generate a thalweg elevation profile CSV file.

Inputs:
  - **USER GENERATED:** An upstream flow polygon that intersects the thalweg centerline 
    - This defines the top of the thalweg longitidnal elevation profile
    - Generate manually in ArcPro or ArcGIS, **define projection to match the thalweg centerline!**
  - The area of interest (AOI) shapefile
  - Number of low pass filter runs to smooth topography with (15 is default)
  - PAEK centerline smoothing distance / 'tolerance' in meters (6 is default)
    - PAEK: Polynomial Approximation with Exponential Kernel
    - For more information on the PAEK smoothing algorithm see ESRI's documentation 
      (https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/latest/tool-reference/cartography/smooth-line.htm)
  - The topo-bathymetric DEM

Note: Please verify centerline quality, and edit if necessary, before generating the thalweg elevation profile.

Relevant outputs:
  - Smooth thalweg centerline -- thalweg_centerline.shp
  - Thalweg elevation profile CSV file -- xyz_elevation_table.csv

#### Tab 4 -- Thalweg based DEM detrending
#### Tab 5 -- Selecting key flow stage heights + refining center-lines 
#### Tab 6(1) -- Running key flow stage GCS analysis
#### Tab 6(2) -- Interpreting output statistics and plots
#### Tab 7 --  Exporting GCS to River Builder

## Interpreting results